README.md, before:

# Vertical Driven Development (VDD) for Cursor IDE

> **Build only what SHOULD change, not what COULD change.**

A comprehensive ruleset and documentation system for Cursor IDE that guides AI-assisted development to focus exclusively on business requirements and necessary changes, avoiding over-engineering and premature abstractions.

## 🎯 What is Vertical Driven Development?

Vertical Driven Development (VDD) is an architectural approach that organizes code around **business features and use cases** rather than technical layers. Instead of building horizontal layers (Controllers → Services → Repositories), VDD builds **vertical slices** where each feature contains everything it needs from UI to database.

### Core Principles

1. **Business Requirement First** - Always start with the business problem, not technical architecture
2. **Vertical Slice Organization** - Group by feature/use case, not by technical layer
3. **Simplicity First** - Start with Transaction Script, refactor when code smells emerge
4. **Change-Focused Development** - Only modify what needs to change, couple along the axis of change

### Key Benefits

- ✅ **Faster Delivery** - Complete features in single iterations
- ✅ **Less Over-Engineering** - Build only what's needed, when it's needed
- ✅ **Better Maintainability** - Changes isolated to single slices
- ✅ **Clearer Code** - Related code lives together
- ✅ **Easier Testing** - Test complete slices end-to-end

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Installation

1. **Clone or copy this repository** to your project
2. **The rules are automatically active** - Cursor will use the `.cursor/rules/*.mdc` files
3. **Read the documentation** to understand VDD principles

### Using with Cursor IDE

The VDD rules are automatically applied when you use Cursor's AI features. The rules guide the AI to:

- Focus on business requirements first
- Build vertical slices instead of layers
- Start simple and refactor when needed
- Minimize coupling between features

### Integration with SDD Toolkit

This VDD ruleset integrates seamlessly with the [Spec-Kit Command Cursor](https://github.com/madebyaris/spec-kit-command-cursor) toolkit:

- Use `/brief` for most features (80% of cases)
- Full SDD workflow for complex features (20% of cases)
- All specs and plans focus on vertical slices

See [SDD Integration Guide](docs/SDD-INTEGRATION.md) for details.

## 📚 Documentation

### Core Documentation

- **[VDD Guidelines](docs/VDD-GUIDELINES.md)** - Comprehensive guide with examples, patterns, and best practices
- **[SDD Integration](docs/SDD-INTEGRATION.md)** - How to use VDD with Spec-Driven Development toolkit

### Cursor Rules

The following rules are automatically applied in Cursor:

- **[vdd-core-principles.mdc](.cursor/rules/vdd-core-principles.mdc)** - Core VDD philosophy and principles
- **[vdd-development-workflow.mdc](.cursor/rules/vdd-development-workflow.mdc)** - Step-by-step development process
- **[vdd-sdd-integration.mdc](.cursor/rules/vdd-sdd-integration.mdc)** - SDD toolkit integration guidelines

## 🏗️ Architecture Comparison

### Traditional Layered Architecture ❌

```
src/
  controllers/
    order-controller.ts
  services/
    order-service.ts
  repositories/
    order-repository.ts
  models/
    order.ts
```

**Problems:**
- Changes ripple across multiple layers
- Over-abstraction for simple features
- Hard to see complete feature flow
- Slow feature delivery

### Vertical Slice Architecture ✅

```
features/
  create-order/
    create-order.api.ts
    create-order.handler.ts
    create-order.repository.ts
    create-order.test.ts
  cancel-order/
    cancel-order.api.ts
    cancel-order.handler.ts
    cancel-order.repository.ts
    cancel-order.test.ts
```

**Benefits:**
- Changes isolated to single slices
- Simple by default, complex when needed
- Complete feature flow visible
- Fast feature delivery

## 💡 Key Concepts

### Vertical Slice

A **vertical slice** is a complete, end-to-end feature that includes:

- **Presentation**: UI components, API endpoints, forms
- **Business Logic**: Validation, calculations, business rules
- **Data Access**: Database queries, external API calls, persistence

All of these live together, organized by feature.

### Coupling Principles

- **Maximize coupling within a slice**: Related code should be close together
- **Minimize coupling between slices**: Slices should be independent
- **Couple along the axis of change**: Features that change together should be together

### Development Workflow

1. **Start with Happy Path** - Simplest implementation that works
2. **Build Vertically** - One complete slice at a time
3. **Add Complexity Incrementally** - Only when simple solution shows limitations
4. **Refactor When Needed** - Based on code smells, not preemptively

## 📖 Examples

### Example 1: Simple Feature (Single File)

```typescript
// features/user-registration/user-registration.ts
export async function registerUser(email: string, password: string) {
  // Validation
  if (!isValidEmail(email)) throw new Error('Invalid email');
  if (password.length < 8) throw new Error('Password too short');
  
  // Check duplicate
  const existing = await db.users.findByEmail(email);
  if (existing) throw new Error('Email already exists');
  
  // Create user
  const hashedPassword = await bcrypt.hash(password, 10);
  const user = {
    id: generateId(),
    email,
    password: hashedPassword,
    createdAt: new Date()
  };
  
  await db.users.insert(user);
  return user;
}
```

### Example 2: Feature Folder Structure

```
features/
  create-order/
    create-order.api.ts          # API endpoint
    create-order.handler.ts       # Business logic
    create-order.repository.ts    # Data access
    create-order.types.ts         # Types
    create-order.test.ts         # Tests
```

## 🎓 Learning Resources

### Core References

- [Jimmy Bogard - Vertical Slice Architecture](https://www.jimmybogard.com/vertical-slice-architecture/)
- [SSENSE - Vertical Software Development](https://medium.com/ssense-tech/vertical-software-development-495b73f7fcdf)
- [Model-Driven Software Development Research](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228388816_Model-Driven_Software_Development)

### Related Tools

- [Spec-Kit Command Cursor](https://github.com/madebyaris/spec-kit-command-cursor) - SDD toolkit for Cursor IDE

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Areas for improvement:

- Additional examples and patterns
- Language/framework-specific guidance
- More detailed refactoring guidelines
- Integration with other tools

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0 - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- Inspired by Jimmy Bogard's Vertical Slice Architecture
- Built for the Cursor IDE community
- Integrates with Spec-Kit Command Cursor by [@madebyaris](https://github.com/madebyaris)

## 🔗 Quick Links

- [VDD Guidelines](docs/VDD-GUIDELINES.md) - Detailed guidelines and examples
- [SDD Integration](docs/SDD-INTEGRATION.md) - Using VDD with SDD toolkit
- [Core Principles](.cursor/rules/vdd-core-principles.mdc) - VDD philosophy
- [Development Workflow](.cursor/rules/vdd-development-workflow.mdc) - Step-by-step process
- [SDD Integration Rules](.cursor/rules/vdd-sdd-integration.mdc) - Integration guidelines

---

**Remember: Build only what SHOULD change, not what COULD change.**

Commit message:

Enhance README and rules documentation with new commands for building complete applications. Updated globs in core principles, development workflow, and SDD integration rules to focus on specific directories. Added detailed usage instructions for `/vdd-build` and `/vdd-all-in-one` commands.

README.md, after:

# Vertical Driven Development (VDD) for Cursor IDE

> **Build only what SHOULD change, not what COULD change.**

A comprehensive ruleset and documentation system for Cursor IDE that guides AI-assisted development to focus exclusively on business requirements and necessary changes, avoiding over-engineering and premature abstractions.

## 🎯 What is Vertical Driven Development?

Vertical Driven Development (VDD) is an architectural approach that organizes code around **business features and use cases** rather than technical layers. Instead of building horizontal layers (Controllers → Services → Repositories), VDD builds **vertical slices** where each feature contains everything it needs from UI to database.

### Core Principles

1. **Business Requirement First** - Always start with the business problem, not technical architecture
2. **Vertical Slice Organization** - Group by feature/use case, not by technical layer
3. **Simplicity First** - Start with Transaction Script, refactor when code smells emerge
4. **Change-Focused Development** - Only modify what needs to change, couple along the axis of change

### Key Benefits

- ✅ **Faster Delivery** - Complete features in single iterations
- ✅ **Less Over-Engineering** - Build only what's needed, when it's needed
- ✅ **Better Maintainability** - Changes isolated to single slices
- ✅ **Clearer Code** - Related code lives together
- ✅ **Easier Testing** - Test complete slices end-to-end

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Installation

1. **Clone or copy this repository** to your project
2. **The rules are automatically active** - Cursor will use the `.cursor/rules/*.mdc` files
3. **Read the documentation** to understand VDD principles

### Using with Cursor IDE

The VDD rules are automatically applied when you use Cursor's AI features. The rules guide the AI to:

- Focus on business requirements first
- Build vertical slices instead of layers
- Start simple and refactor when needed
- Minimize coupling between features

### Integration with SDD Toolkit

This VDD ruleset integrates seamlessly with the [Spec-Kit Command Cursor](https://github.com/madebyaris/spec-kit-command-cursor) toolkit:

- Use `/brief` for most features (80% of cases)
- Full SDD workflow for complex features (20% of cases)
- **Use `/vdd-build` or `/vdd-all-in-one` for complete apps** - Build entire applications with multiple vertical slices in one command
- All specs and plans focus on vertical slices

See [SDD Integration Guide](docs/SDD-INTEGRATION.md) for details.

## 📚 Documentation

### Core Documentation

- **[VDD Guidelines](docs/VDD-GUIDELINES.md)** - Comprehensive guide with examples, patterns, and best practices
- **[SDD Integration](docs/SDD-INTEGRATION.md)** - How to use VDD with Spec-Driven Development toolkit

### Cursor Rules

The following rules are automatically applied in Cursor:

- **[vdd-core-principles.mdc](.cursor/rules/vdd-core-principles.mdc)** - Core VDD philosophy and principles
- **[vdd-development-workflow.mdc](.cursor/rules/vdd-development-workflow.mdc)** - Step-by-step development process
- **[vdd-sdd-integration.mdc](.cursor/rules/vdd-sdd-integration.mdc)** - SDD toolkit integration guidelines

### Cursor Commands

The following commands are available in Cursor:

- **[/vdd-build](.cursor/commands/vdd-build.mdc)** - Build complete apps/features with VDD principles (combines SDD full-plan workflow)
- **[/vdd-all-in-one](.cursor/commands/vdd-all-in-one.mdc)** - Alias for `/vdd-build`

## 🏗️ Architecture Comparison

### Traditional Layered Architecture ❌

```
src/
  controllers/
    order-controller.ts
  services/
    order-service.ts
  repositories/
    order-repository.ts
  models/
    order.ts
```

**Problems:**
- Changes ripple across multiple layers
- Over-abstraction for simple features
- Hard to see complete feature flow
- Slow feature delivery

### Vertical Slice Architecture ✅

```
features/
  create-order/
    create-order.api.ts
    create-order.handler.ts
    create-order.repository.ts
    create-order.test.ts
  cancel-order/
    cancel-order.api.ts
    cancel-order.handler.ts
    cancel-order.repository.ts
    cancel-order.test.ts
```

**Benefits:**
- Changes isolated to single slices
- Simple by default, complex when needed
- Complete feature flow visible
- Fast feature delivery

## 💡 Key Concepts

### Vertical Slice

A **vertical slice** is a complete, end-to-end feature that includes:

- **Presentation**: UI components, API endpoints, forms
- **Business Logic**: Validation, calculations, business rules
- **Data Access**: Database queries, external API calls, persistence

All of these live together, organized by feature.

### Coupling Principles

- **Maximize coupling within a slice**: Related code should be close together
- **Minimize coupling between slices**: Slices should be independent
- **Couple along the axis of change**: Features that change together should be together

### Development Workflow

1. **Start with Happy Path** - Simplest implementation that works
2. **Build Vertically** - One complete slice at a time
3. **Add Complexity Incrementally** - Only when simple solution shows limitations
4. **Refactor When Needed** - Based on code smells, not preemptively

## 📖 Examples

### Example 1: Simple Feature (Single File)

```typescript
// features/user-registration/user-registration.ts
export async function registerUser(email: string, password: string) {
  // Validation
  if (!isValidEmail(email)) throw new Error('Invalid email');
  if (password.length < 8) throw new Error('Password too short');
  
  // Check duplicate
  const existing = await db.users.findByEmail(email);
  if (existing) throw new Error('Email already exists');
  
  // Create user
  const hashedPassword = await bcrypt.hash(password, 10);
  const user = {
    id: generateId(),
    email,
    password: hashedPassword,
    createdAt: new Date()
  };
  
  await db.users.insert(user);
  return user;
}
```

### Example 2: Feature Folder Structure

```
features/
  create-order/
    create-order.api.ts          # API endpoint
    create-order.handler.ts       # Business logic
    create-order.repository.ts    # Data access
    create-order.types.ts         # Types
    create-order.test.ts         # Tests
```

## 🎓 Learning Resources

### Core References

- [Jimmy Bogard - Vertical Slice Architecture](https://www.jimmybogard.com/vertical-slice-architecture/)
- [SSENSE - Vertical Software Development](https://medium.com/ssense-tech/vertical-software-development-495b73f7fcdf)
- [Model-Driven Software Development Research](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228388816_Model-Driven_Software_Development)

### Related Tools

- [Spec-Kit Command Cursor](https://github.com/madebyaris/spec-kit-command-cursor) - SDD toolkit for Cursor IDE

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Areas for improvement:

- Additional examples and patterns
- Language/framework-specific guidance
- More detailed refactoring guidelines
- Integration with other tools

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0 - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- Inspired by Jimmy Bogard's Vertical Slice Architecture
- Built for the Cursor IDE community
- Integrates with Spec-Kit Command Cursor by [@madebyaris](https://github.com/madebyaris)

## 🔗 Quick Links

- [VDD Guidelines](docs/VDD-GUIDELINES.md) - Detailed guidelines and examples
- [SDD Integration](docs/SDD-INTEGRATION.md) - Using VDD with SDD toolkit
- [Core Principles](.cursor/rules/vdd-core-principles.mdc) - VDD philosophy
- [Development Workflow](.cursor/rules/vdd-development-workflow.mdc) - Step-by-step process
- [SDD Integration Rules](.cursor/rules/vdd-sdd-integration.mdc) - Integration guidelines

---

**Remember: Build only what SHOULD change, not what COULD change.**
